What if a writer or novelist decided to write a 300-page book with no breaks in the text for new ideas, new chapters, or even character dialogue? It would be so overwhelming that the reader would probably take one look and close the book forever. When writing is divided up into manageable parts that are cohesive, it's much easier for the reader to take in and process. A paragraph is a distinct segment of writing, often includes more than one sentence, and is separated from other paragraphs and text by a space.


Paragraphs break up text into manageable chunks that are easily read and visually make it more appealing and less daunting. The word paragraph comes from the Latin word paragraphos, which is roughly translated to mean a short-stroke marking a break in sense. The term graph is Latin for writing.


There is often some confusion about what the difference is between a paragraph and an essay. The best way to understand the difference is to think of the essay as a bigger version of a paragraph. A paragraph is made up of a topic sentence, supporting sentences, and a concluding sentence. An essay has all the same parts; only instead of sentences, an essay is made up of paragraphs.






 Save  Timeline Autoplay  Speed Normal
 Video  Quiz  Course
240K views
Basic Paragraph Format
It is important to note that a paragraph does not have a minimum or maximum number of sentences that it must have to fit the definition of a paragraph. Some writers will opt to use very short paragraphs, while others will include dozens of sentences in their paragraphs. It is also important to know that most writers separate lines of dialogue into paragraphs, so if a character only speaks a single line, it will be its own paragraph.


Keeping that in mind, there is a general agreement on the format of a standard paragraph, which especially applies to informational and argumentative or persuasive writing. A paragraph should be divided into three distinct sections that each serve a purpose to the paragraph as a whole.




































Topic Sentence - The topic sentence is the sentence that lays out a preview of what the paragraph will be about. Think of it as a preview of the paragraph. It puts the reader's mindset into the right place to digest the information.
Supporting Sentence - The supporting sentence is the most important part of the paragraph and provides details to support the topic sentence. If the topic sentence is about frogs, then the details should be about frogs as well. This section can be longer or shorter depending on the content and the writer's preference.
Concluding Sentence- The concluding sentence wraps up the paragraph and ties back to the topic sentence. A conclusion could be a reiteration of the topic, an opinion based on the topic, or a way to wrap up the paragraph with a more general statement.
The following paragraph is an example of a simple paragraph that follows the basic paragraph form.

1 There are many different kinds of animals that live in China. 2 Tigers and leopards are animals that live in China's forests in the north. 2 In the jungles, monkeys swing in the trees, and elephants walk through the brush. The cities in China are filled with millions of people. 2 There are camels in the deserts in China that people use for transportation. 3 Lots of different kinds of animals make their home in China.

In the example paragraph, the topic sentence, labeled with a 1, states the paragraph's main idea. The reader can rightfully assume that the content will have to do with animals in China.
The supporting sentences, indicated by the 2, are separated into sentences that give more specific information about animals that live in China. Each detail directly supports the main topic.
The concluding sentence, indicated by 3, restates the topic sentence in a slightly different way to help wrap up the paragraph.
The highlighted sentence in the paragraph is important to note because it is a detail that does not relate closely enough to the topic sentence to be included in the essay. While the sentence does mention China, it would be better placed under a paragraph about people in China or the cities of China.
